hi there welcome to black gumbo southern
gardening my name is Scott this is my
son Samuel and we're gonna talk today
about pruning pepper plants
[Music]
what are y'all doing under there it's
raining huh
sprinkle it a little sprinkle yeah
nobody nope doesn't look like rain
clouds but we're getting all kinds of
rain out here today all right so why do
you prune pepper plants don't you just
stick them in the ground and let them
grow well I've done that huh what do you
say you can actually remember well you
can a couple of years ago I had some
poblano pepper plants I put them in the
ground I had four of them and I man I
had so many poblanos I didn't know what
to do with them all boy when I trying to
grow bell peppers I don't really get
that many fruits I get maybe three four
plants fruits per plant well that's just
not enough I need more than that so I've
since learned that I can prune my pepper
plants and I've studied it I've watched
all kinds of videos and and now I have
some experience doing so and I want to
pass on what I've learned to you now the
Sam is holding a typical sprout that's
about eight to nine weeks old we've
planted these from seeds a long time ago
and this is what they look like at this
stage and if you let them grow like that
what you're gonna get is a leggy tall
straggly kind of plant that doesn't have
a lot of bushiness to it and the problem
with that is peppers tend to get lanky
and they they tend to want to put all of
their energy straight up in the plant
and if all that energy goes straight up
in the plant well you have a tall plant
that can get blown over by wind you have
a tall plant that can fall over with
with the heaviness of its fruit you
don't have a strong plant so what we
have here is a plant that's one stem and
all the growth energy is going right
here to this little this little chute
right here this this this growth sprout
we have all the energy is going to right
here right at the top and you can see
we're not getting a whole lot of
production of side limbs we're getting a
lot of vertical production and all the
growth and all the energy is being being
sent right here to the top of the plant
Samuel is going to go
there with this little scissors and he's
gonna top this plant he's gonna cut
right here no hold on let me explain
what we're gonna do notice we have one
two three four five six seven all those
who can tennis add and that eighth one
is really sad we you want to have at
least four to six leaves on your plant
so that it can it can survive the
topping now this is for the plants best
interest it's for our best interest but
you want to leave the biggest leaves so
Sam see these two leaves right here yeah
if you can leave those there and if you
can cut whatever's above that you get it
if you can cut what's above that this
plant will be successfully pretty old
careful don't wait wait wait wait why
aren't you coming from this way I had
originally wanted to show you our potted
plants that we were handling and how we
prune them but I had did not push the
record button but here is a good example
this one's maybe a little earlier than
I'd like to prove but we're gonna show
you anyway
notice the main shaft the main shaft is
growing up and right here you've got
this all the growth going to the top
here where it wants to grow that plant
straight up it wants to make it tall and
lanky what samuels gonna do is he gonna
come in and he's gonna cut that top
little growth node out go ahead and go
ahead get in there can you get into cut
down without cutting the other leaves
perfect that is a perfect prune look at
that you want to leave behind six to
four is the bare minimum six is better
eight as best of these big leaves and so
what samuel did I apologize I had this
plant already and I didn't push the
record button so we missed it when
samuel trimmed off the top please but
you can see him right here these buds
these leaves they were sitting right
there right at the top that was where
all the energy of the plant was going
and samuel came and topped off that
plant and what we have left is one one
two three four five six seven
there are seven there should be eight
one of them got even by caterpillars
there should be six to eight good leaves
there and that's gonna force that plant
now since the growth bud has been
trimmed from the top all the energy is
gonna go to side growth and let me show
you what you get when you when you prune
your pepper plants and and you encourage
better cycling this plant you can see
here you can look in here and see where
the main central stem has been chopped
has been pruned right there you can see
the cut this was cut two or three weeks
ago and what's happened to this plant
look at all this growth all those little
suckers that are in the in the crotches
of these leaf limbs here are encouraged
now to grow and put out new limbs
well if you have new limbs on your
pepper plant you're going to have lots
of fruit so here's our two pepper plant
side-by-side you can see the one that we
just now unfortunately not on video we
topped we took the top growth bud off of
it and you can see the one that has been
pruned several weeks ago and all the
good growth that's come from that all
that side growth all that's going to
equal more fruit and this one happens to
be a what is it uh a habanero is the
gold habanero and this one happens to be
a red bell pepper and but you treat all
pepper plants pretty much the same and
let me show you some of my other pop
pepper plants and where i trimmed them
where I've pruned this we can see here
this one I trimmed right there at the
the main stem and you can see already
that some of the the shoots are looking
a little bit larger they're about ready
to burst forth and I'm gonna get more
growth on all these pepper plants that
I've groomed here's another one that I
pruned
you can see that I cut it right there
and now all the shoots coming out of the
all the suckers are gonna form into new
branches here's one that's been pruned a
few maybe four days ago and you can see
already that some of the growth on that
on that main stem is starting to branch
out sending out shoots on the on the
side well that's how we prune peppers
here in our garden and I hope you've
learned something I certainly have
learned some things hopefully in a few
weeks maybe a couple of maybe a month or
two we can show you the fruit
pruning our pepper plants will certainly
let you know how it goes thanks for
joining us at black gumbo southern
gardening please like our facebook page
follow our blog and follow our youtube
channel and hopefully we can learn some
things about gardening together what do
you think good day
you